*********************
10. Natural Deduction
*********************

Note to self: The next few chapters separate complexities on the way
to full first-order logic. The first, addressed here, is the shift
from a semantic to a syntactic approach to judging truth. Derivation
vs. Evaluation.

We will use the reasoning principles just validated semantically to
formulate analogous syntactic rules: i.e., natural deduction. These
rules provide a needed alternative to truth tables for ascertaining
truth in propositional logic. Truth tables grow too large too fast.

The next two chapters introduce, respectively, predicate logic without
quantifiers but including interpretations over arbitrary sets; and then
the introduction of quantifiers. 
[FIX BELOW: UNDER CONSTRUCTION.]

One way to define a set of *inference* rules that define ways that one
can transform one set of expressions (premises) into another (a
conclusion) in such a manner that whenver all the premises are true,
the conclusion will be, too.

Why would anyone care about rules for transforming expressions in
abstract languages? Well, it turns out that *syntactic* reasoning is
pretty useful. The idea is that we represent a real-world phenomenon
symbolically, in such a language, so the abstract sentence means
something in the real world.

Now comes the key idea: if we imbue mathematical expressions with
real-world meanings and then transform these expression in accordance
with valid rules for acceptable transformations of such expressions,
then the resulting expressions will also be meaningful.

A logic, then, is basically a formal language, one that defines a set
of well formed expressions, and that provides a set of *inference*
rules for taking a set of expressions as premises and deriving another
one as a consequence. Mathematical logic allows us to replace human
mental reasoning with the mechanical *transformation of symbolic
expressions*. 

